AI has been the hot topic for the past
few years, but it seems like nobody's
noticed that it's actually just medieval
alchemy. Duh. We're all so busy
scrambling and trying to figure out how
AI is going to change everything when
all we need to do is look a thousand
years into the past to figure it all
out. You're of course already familiar
with what artificial intelligence is.
So, your first question here is
probably, what's alchemy? Well, to the
medieval mind, alchemy was this weird
specialized branch of natural philosophy
that thought it could uncover all the
deepest secrets of nature. Alchemists
basically wanted to create an agent of
perfection, something that could turn
lead into gold and cure human illnesses.
Coincidentally, just like Sam Alman,
they tried to constantly sell everyone
on the future implications of their
experiments instead of what was actually
doable in the present moment. You might
use AI all the time. I know the
corporate world and American
universities pretty much run on chat GBT
at this point, but could you actually
explain to me in an indepth way how
these large language models work? And
before you copy paste some long
Wikipedia answer into the comment
section, the answer is no, because even
the engineers who built them don't fully
understand how they work. This is called
the blackbox problem. You see, these
engineers designed the architectures and
training processes for something like
chat GBT. But if you were to ask them,
they don't actually fully understand the
internal logic of how these models
arrive at specific outputs. Wouldn't you
believe it? Flying blind like this is
actually an incredibly medieval concept.
Medieval Europe was a truly god-fearing
place in a way that not even the most
religious among us could imagine today.
Everything was completely steeped in
Christianity, including alchemy. And the
alchemists saw themselves as co-creators
with God who could change the very
essence of matter from one thing to
another. One of their main pursuits was
to discover the philosopher stone. Shout
out all my potter heads, which was a
concept that dates all the way back to
the Greek mystic Zimos of Paniplo in the
4th century. Basically, the alchemist
figured they could create this legendary
substance. Not only would it turn lead
into gold, it would also heal all
ailments and give human beings
immortality. Like I said, medieval
Europe was extremely Christian. And if
you've ever read the Bible, you'll
notice that a lot of the patriarchs in
the Old Testament apparently lived
incredibly long lives. We're talking 8
or 900 years. So, if you're a medieval
alchemist reading this, it's not crazy
to think that maybe those biblical
patriarchs had access to some secret
that you need to discover. Elias Ashol
was a 17th century alchemist, which is a
little outside the boundaries of the
Middle Ages, but he was drawing on
medieval knowledge when he claimed that
the history of the philosopher stone
went all the way back to Adam, who
learned about the stone directly from
God. This information was then passed
down through Moses and Jacob and all the
other main characters in the Old
Testament, but it had been lost
somewhere in the distant past. Also,
alchemy wasn't just a Western European
pursuit either, and it was actually the
Byzantines in the east along with Arab
scientists who initially picked up where
the Greeks left off. I'm going to get a
little technical here for a second, but
just stay with me because I promise this
all links back to AI. There was this 8th
century Muslim alchemist named Jabir
Iban Hayan, and he was big on the idea
that every metal was a combination of
fire, earth, water, and air. So if you
can imagine that all metals have some
combination of these four basic
properties, you should theoretically be
able to transmute one metal into another
by rearranging these properties. That's
how you would be able to turn lead into
gold. The change could only happen from
some outside substance which was called
zerion in Greek and alixier in Arabic
which was latinized into the word
elixir. This elixir, Jabir figured, was
some sort of powder and you could
somehow make it from the philosopher
stone. In the same way, a modern neural
network is just a bunch of dead math
until you apply the elixir of training
data and optimized weights. That is what
transmutes the code into something that
feels alive. The responses you get from
your AI agent. Now, I want to give
credit to our medieval ancestors here
because there were plenty of thinkers
throughout the Middle Ages who called
bull on all of this. There was the
legendary Persian philosopher Avisa who
was also an incredibly influential
physician and he basically tore this
whole alchemy theory down saying those
of the chemical craft know well that no
change can be affected in the different
species of substances though they can
produce the appearance of such change.
To put it simply, he's saying it's easy
to drum up hype and sell people on the
idea of this magic process, but those
who had actually worked with this stuff
knew that it was impossible. That brings
us to our current AI problem. Now, the
title of this video says that AI isn't
the future, but I'd like to clarify that
I'm not some lite and I'm not actually
against AI technology generally. It does
seem to have some beneficial use cases,
especially in the medical field. And I
think it is something that's going to be
part of our existence for the
foreseeable future. What I am saying is
that history teaches us that we should
be wary of any miraculous thing that's
going to fix all of our problems in one
fell swoop. All you need to do is look
at medieval alchemy, which proves that
this pursuit of perfection is part of
the human psyche, and it's never quite
worked out the way it was supposed to.
There's this insane book that came out
recently called On the Future of
Species, and it's all about how AI is
literally primed to create synthetic
life. Is it ethical? Who cares? We can
finally perfect the human genome and
create a race of super soldiers. But
before we get to that, I mentioned
earlier the black box, the place where
complexity hides the truth. To be
totally honest, I've been dealing with a
version of that in my own personal
finances. I'm the type of person who
signs up for free trials to test out new
editing tools or research archives and
then completely forgets to cancel them.
And that's why I'm so excited to tell
you about today's sponsor, Rocket Money.
As someone who gets easily overwhelmed
by multiple accounts, their singular
view feature has been a lifesaver. I
securely linked my checking, savings,
and even my business accounts. And now I
have a single dashboard to monitor my
overall financial health without logging
into four different portals. But the
best part for me is the subscription
management. Rocket Money automatically
tracks every recurring charge I have and
puts them in one consolidated list. It's
helped me stay on top of those forgotten
trials I mentioned earlier, and it even
helps me cancel them with just a few
taps. Go to rocketmoney.com/mindset
to get started for free. You can also
scan the QR code here on the screen or
click the link in my description. Unlock
even more features when you sign up for
premium. Start transmuting your spending
into savings at rocketmoney.com/mindset.
So, you know how I said before that
alchemists saw themselves as co-creators
with God? Well, they believe that
everything is made of a base prima
materia that can be broken down and
reorganized. In his new book on the
future of species, the genomic
entrepreneur Adrien Wolfson says that
with AI, we're making this alchemist
dream an actual reality. For my money,
the term genomic entrepreneur sounds
incredibly dystopian, but I guess that's
beside the point. Wolson writes, and I
quote, "The impulse to blend the
anatomical traits of other species with
those of humans appears to be hardwired
into our imagination." And he's totally
right. In the Bible, the prophet Ezekiel
sees four beasts emerge from a burning
cloud. Each has wings and four faces.
That of a man, a lion, an ox, and an
eagle. There was also the creature
Barack, a fusion between a mule and a
donkey with wings and a human face that
was said to have carried Muhammad on his
journeys. Wolson claims that with the
new neural network technology of
Alphafold 2, we can take the structures
of complex proteins and actually predict
them. That means we would be able to
create new ones. And if we can create
new proteins, that would suggest that we
can create new forms of life. One more
quote from Wolson here. He says,
"Biology now stands at the threshold of
transitioning from a largely descriptive
science into a generative one." Dude,
this is literally just medieval alchemy.
We've tried all of this before. There
was this alchemist named Paraselus who
was working at the tail end of the
Middle Ages into what we would now call
the Renaissance. He had this crazy idea
that life didn't actually require a womb
and with the right ingredients and a
controlled environment you could
theoretically create a human or maybe
even something better than a human. In
his seinal work deurram
paracela says that human semen is the
primary seed which makes sense.
According to his theory if you sealed it
up in a cucurbit which was a glass
vessel and buried it in horse dung for
40 days something miraculous would
happen. Of course, the warm dung would
provide a steady, gentle heat that
mimicked the warmth of a womb. It makes
total sense. After 40 days, a
transparent human-like form would start
to emerge. It would then have to be fed
on human blood for 40 weeks to reach
maturity. The goal for the alchemists
wasn't just curiosity or trying
different things in some early form of
the modern scientific method. They
wanted sovereignty over nature. For our
AI overlords, sovereignty over
information apparently isn't enough.
They want the power to create and edit
human life. Quickly back to Paracelis
for a second. Don't you wonder what kind
of personality would come up with an
idea like this? Well, he was known for
outbursts of swearing. He loved to throw
temper tantrums and insult everyone
around him. One of his close companions
wrote of him, "The two years I passed in
his company, he spent in drinking and
gluttony day and night. He could not be
found sober an hour or two together." I
mean, that is kind of relatable, but
still. This was the man who was trying
to unlock the secrets of the universe
and attain ultimate power. Obviously,
Paraselus never achieved his goal of
creating human life, but he was a major
pioneer in the field of what we now know
as toxicology. And he was clearly a
tortured genius. I guess in some ways
you could say he shot for the moon. He
missed, but he landed in the stars.
Let's come back to the present day and
take a look at what the AI guys are
saying. Sam Alman claimed in an
interview that AGI or artificial general
intelligence will be the most
significant technological development in
human history. According to Altman, it
has the potential to solve every problem
we face. That sure does sound a lot like
what the Islamic alchemist Jabir Iban
Hayam said about the philosopher stone.
He claimed it could bring perfect health
and rejuvenation to a decayed world. So
Altman is saying here that he views AGI
as a singular universal fix for the
human condition. But I think we all know
that reality is always more complicated
than that. Deis Hassabis, the co-founder
of Deep Mind, has said similar things.
And his stated two-step mission is to
solve intelligence and then use that to
solve everything else. Why does that
sound so familiar, too? Oh, that's
right. Because the 13th century English
philosopher and alchemist Roger Bacon
said the same thing 800 years ago. He
was seeking something called cientia
integralis, a universal science that
linked the material world to the soul.
Just like Roger, Demisabis is
essentially looking for the single
source code of reality, the key to open
up every lock. Let's go back to Altman
for a second because I think for most of
us, he's the face of this whole AI
movement. He repeats this one phrase all
the time, which is that AGI will be a
breaking point in history. As I was
researching this video, that kept
standing out to me. Breaking point.
Breaking point. breaking point. I then
of course realized that Altman was just
repeating a medieval concept. Have you
ever heard of the three Hermes, also
known as the Hermes Trisma?
No. All right, let me fill you in.
Medieval Latin culture, especially
starting in the 12th century, adopted a
specific legend to explain how highlevel
knowledge survived the major disasters
of history. So, if the entire world was
flooded during the Noah's Arc story in
the Bible, how did humans rebuild? To
answer this burning question, medieval
thinkers came up with a sacred genealogy
of three main characters who were each
appointed by God to basically protect
and restore the secrets of nature. The
first was Enoch who was there before the
great flood. He was carried off to
heaven and he was the first to get this
divine wisdom. Then there was of course
Noah who was saved by God during the
flood. He was thought of in the medieval
mind as a kind of bridge figure. So he's
carrying the seeds of knowledge through
all of the destruction. Then we come to
Mercurious in post flood Egypt and he's
the greatest of them all. He's a king
and a philosopher and a prophet who
formerly creates the liberal and
mechanical arts which of course includes
alchemy. So to sum it all up in the
medieval view, the great flood of the
Noah's arc story was this
hugeformational reset that left humanity
in a darkened state that they had to be
recovered from. Just like Mercurius is
the final figure who comes to restore
knowledge after this global disaster,
these guys like Sam Alman seem to think
of themselves and AGI generally as this
tool that's going to restore human
potential after this flood of chaotic
data that's been released on us and has
been beating us over the head since the
advent of the internet. This is the
missing piece, the philosopher stone
that we need to ascend to the next level
of humanity. We can really go down the
rabbit hole here. And the modern
medievalist Michela Pereira talks a lot
about how alchemists really made sure to
distinguish themselves from both just
being theory guys or just being
craftsmen who got their hands dirty.
They considered themselves this unique
class of philosophers who thought with
their hands. The most radical idea that
the alchemists had, of course, was that
you could be God. You could break a
substance and reduce it to its formless
state before giving it its ultimate
perfect form. This is literally exactly
how large language models are built.
They take the base matter of human
culture and knowledge, so basically
entire internet, break it down into this
mathematical soup, and then reform it
into a perfected AGI that can speak
every language and solve every problem.
Even before the rise of AI in the 2020s,
it's been obvious for a long time that
tech bros like Elon Musk and Mark
Zuckerberg and Peter Teal actually have
a weirdly negative view of humanity,
which is horrifying because they hold so
much influence over us and we're
humanity. If you listen to the new AI
pioneers like Alexander Wang, who was on
Theo Vaughn show about a year ago, their
whole attitude is basically that humans
are corruptible and imperfect. It's
really hard to increase shareholder
value when you need to eat and poop and
sleep. But with AI, now there's an
opportunity. AI is infinitely scalable
and it doesn't need to sleep or poop. So
now, of course, this is turning into a
crazy power grab and a massive AI bubble
where these companies are trying to
replace flawed human labor and
decision-making with the perfection of
artificial intelligence. I mentioned
tech bros, and they really do have a lot
in common with medieval alchemists.
Plus, I think it's important that we
understand the personalities of the
puppet masters who pull the strings of
our digital world. Before we do that,
super quick. I've got a Patreon link in
the description below if you want to be
part of the Medieval Mindset book club,
get access to the podcast and video
scripts and the Medieval Mindset reading
list and special content that doesn't
get posted on my main channel, as well
as a special shout out at the end of
every single one of my videos. Go sign
up today. Anyway, I've talked a lot
about Sam Alman, but what about Jensen
Hang, the Nvidia guy? Boy, he sure does
remind me of Elaine Deil, the 12th
century French polymath. A polymath is a
person of wide-ranging knowledge or
learning across different fields. And
polymath is the medieval mindset word of
the week. So try to weave that into some
conversations over the next few days.
Ela Deo was another medieval genius and
he wrote this masterpiece called the
anti-Cladianis. It's a poem and in the
poem, nature looks at the world and sees
that it's corrupted by vice. She decides
that the only way to save humanity is to
create a new kind of man who is
physically, intellectually, and morally
perfect. Maybe you think you know where
this is going because you read
Frankenstein. But I assure you, you're
wrong. Just like you or I would do,
nature gathers the seven liberal arts,
grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic,
geometry, music, and astronomy to build
a chariot that can travel to the
heavens. Then along comes prudence. Now,
it's worth mentioning that like most
medieval writing, this is an allegorical
poem and these sort of intangible ideas
like nature and prudence are depicted as
living beings. Anyway, Prudence takes
the chariot and drives it all through
the celestial spheres. Along the way,
she encounters the limits of human
reason and has to be helped by faith and
theology to finally reach the throne of
God. But wait, we in the present day
have reached the limits of human reason.
But instead of using faith and theology
to ascend to divinity, we're using
algorithmic models that nobody really
understands. Interesting. In the end of
Deil's poem, God grants a soul to the
new man, and nature crafts a body for
it. It all wraps up in this big boss
fight where the new man and the virtues
fight against and defeat the vices,
which are greed and luxury and pride and
so on and so forth. Now, this poem isn't
about alchemy in the turning lead into
gold sense, but it's actually super
alchemical in its philosophy. Alchemists
obviously wanted to purge metal to find
the gold within. And in the poem, nature
purges the elements to create the body
of the new man. It all ties into this
idea that as humans, we carry an
inherent imperfection within us. But
there's something out there, something
that we have the power to discover that
would somehow do away with that
imperfection and allow us to step into a
new ascended life. At this point, I'm
sure you're probably wondering what
literally any of this could have to do
with Jensen Huang. Well, in the poem, De
Leo focuses really specifically on the
physical requirements and ingredients
that would be needed to create this new
man. He's locked in on the material
structure of perfection. That's Huang in
a nutshell. When you look at all of the
top AI guys, he's the one who's the
architect of the material. There's those
like Altman who give these prophecies
about how AI is going to save the world
and cure cancer, blah blah blah. Huang
isn't as concerned with that. He's
concerned about the physical hardware.
Let me frame this in alchemist's term
first so we know what we're talking
about. For medieval alchemists, the
athanor, a word derived from the Arabic
alanor, which means oven or furnace, was
the most important piece of equipment
you could have. It was designed to
maintain a steady, unfluctuating
temperature for weeks or even months
without the alchemist having to stay
awake to tend the fire. You see, when
these guys were trying to turn lead into
gold, they weren't just blasting
everything with fire. They actually
believed in this really specific
progression of temperature that was
supposed to mirror the growth of a
child. Exactly what Paraselis was trying
to do with the horse tongue. Heat grade
one was a gentle warmth called the heat
of a human. Then there was heat grade
two, the heat of a setting hen, which
was a little hotter to encourage the
quickening of matter. Next, they would
crank things a bit higher to grade
three, the heat of calcination, which
was a stronger fire to strip away
impurities. Finally, they would max out
at heat grade four, which was the
melting fire. This was the most intense
heat that was used for the final
transmutation into gold. Jensen Hong and
his boys at NVIDIA are really concerned
with heat, too. Because if you want to
turn AI technology into something usable
and profitable, the physical conditions
have to be just right. The data centers
that Hang supplies are all about thermal
management. The chips are liquid cooled
because the heat to compute is so
intense that it could actually destroy
the hardware that generates it. This is
where all the controversy about AI's
water usage comes in. I'm sure you've
seen this on social media. These data
centers are a huge drain on the local
energy grids of the areas they occupy
because they need an uninterrupted power
supply to keep the hardware running
24/7. So the alchemist belief that
intensity plus time equals
transformation is actually becoming a
reality. If you throw enough energy at a
large enough data set for a long enough
time, intelligence starts to emerge from
the noise. That's the gold being
transformed from the lead of all of
ourformational randomness on the
internet. So, let's land the plane here.
I think we're all a little scared of AI,
and rightfully so. It's been forced into
literally everything against our will,
and it feels like nobody truly
understands what it's capable of. But
it's worth mentioning that people in the
Middle Ages were terrified of alchemy,
too. They said it was witchcraft, and
clergymen were constantly calling out
for being satanic. These alchemists
claim they could cure all diseases and
create immortal beings and turn lead
into gold, but they never actually
achieved any of the insane stuff they
said they would. However, all of their
experimentation laid the groundwork for
the modern fields of chemistry and
biology and medical science. Maybe AI
won't cure cancer or bring about world
peace, but it might have some other
downstream effects that could actually
be pretty helpful in the long run. For
now, you should definitely subscribe to
your favorite YouTube alchemist if you
haven't already, which is me, because
I'm here turning these ridiculous
historical comparisons into pure gold.
And I want to know, what do you think?
Are we right to be afraid of AI, or
should we welcome our new overlords with
open arms? Let me know in the comments.
As always, I'm John. This has been
Medieval Mindset. And remember, the past
isn't gone, it's simply waiting to be
rediscovered.